Interleaving Retrieval with Chain-of-Thought Reasoning
for Knowledge-Intensive Multi-Step Questions
Harsh Trivedi†Niranjan Balasubramanian†
†Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, U.S.A.
{hjtrivedi,niranjan}@cs.stonybrook.eduTushar Khot‡Ashish Sabharwal‡
‡Allen Institute for AI
Seattle, U.S.A.
{tushark,ashishs}@allenai.org
Abstract
Prompting-based large language models
(LLMs) are surprisingly powerful at gener-
ating natural language reasoning steps or
Chains-of-Thoughts (CoT) for multi-step
question answering (QA). They struggle,
however, when the necessary knowledge is
either unavailable to the LLM or not up-to-date
within its parameters. While using the question
to retrieve relevant text from an external
knowledge source helps LLMs, we observe
that this one-step retrieve-and-read approach
is insufficient for multi-step QA. Here, what
to retrieve depends on what has already
been derived , which in turn may depend on
what was previously retrieved . To address
this, we propose IRCoT, a new approach
for multi-step QA that interleaves retrieval
with steps (sentences) in a CoT, guiding the
retrieval with CoT and in turn using retrieved
results to improve CoT. Using IRCoT with
GPT3 substantially improves retrieval (up to
21 points) as well as downstream QA (up
to 15 points) on four datasets: HotpotQA,
2WikiMultihopQA, MuSiQue, and IIRC. We
observe similar substantial gains in out-of-
distribution (OOD) settings as well as with
much smaller models such as Flan-T5-large
without additional training. IRCoT reduces
model hallucination, resulting in factually
more accurate CoT reasoning.1.
1 Introduction
Large language models are capable of answer-
ing complex questions by generating step-by-
step natural language reasoning steps—so called
chains of thoughts (CoT)—when prompted appro-
priately (Wei et al., 2022). This approach has been
successful when all information needed to answer
the question is either provided as context (e.g., al-
gebra questions) or assumed to be present in the
model’s parameters (e.g., commonsense reasoning).
1Code, data, and prompts are available at https://
github.com/stonybrooknlp/ircot
In what country was  
Lost Gravity manufactured?
The Lost Gravity was  
manufactured by Mack Rides.
Mack Rides is a company  
from Germany .
The answer is Germany .
cumulate docs
cumulate docs
cumulate docsFigure 1: IRCoT interleaves chain-of-thought (CoT)
generation and knowledge retrieval steps in order to
guide the retrieval by CoT and vice-versa. This inter-
leaving allows retrieving more relevant information for
later reasoning steps, compared to standard retrieval us-
ing solely the question as the query.
However, for many open-domain questions, all re-
quired knowledge is not always available or up-to-
date in models’ parameters and it’s beneficial to
retrieve knowledge from external sources (Lazari-
dou et al., 2022; Kasai et al., 2022).
How can we augment chain-of-thought prompt-
ing for open-domain, knowledge-intensive tasks
that require complex, multi-step reasoning?
While a one-shot retrieval from a knowledge
source based solely on the question can success-
fully augment LMs with relevant knowledge for
many factoid-based tasks (Lewis et al., 2020; Guu
et al., 2020; Borgeaud et al., 2022; Izacard et al.,
2022), this strategy has clear limitations for more
complex multi-step reasoning questions. For such
questions, one often must retrieve partial knowl-
edge, perform partial reasoning, retrieve additional
information based on the outcome of the partialarXiv:2212.10509v2  [cs.CL]  23 Jun 2023
reasoning done so far, and iterate. As an example,
consider the question illustrated in Fig. 1, “In what
country was Lost Gravity manufactured?” . The
Wikipedia document retrieved using the question
(in particular, the roller coaster Lost Gravity) as the
query does not mention where Lost Gravity was
manufactured. Instead, one must first infer that
it was manufactured by a company called Mack
Rides, and then perform further retrieval, guided
by the inferred company name, to obtain evidence
pointing to the manufacturing country.
Thus, the retrieval and reasoning steps must in-
form each other. Without retrieval, a model is likely
to generate an incorrect reasoning step due to hallu-
cination. Additionally, without generating the first
reasoning step, the text supporting the second step
can’t be identified easily given the lack of lexical or
even semantic overlap with the question. In other
words, we need retrieved facts in order to generate
factually correct reasoning steps and the reasoning
steps to retrieve relevant facts.
Based on this intuition, we propose an interleav-
ing approach to this problem, where the idea is to
use retrieval to guide the chain-of-thought (CoT)
reasoning steps and use CoT reasoning to guide the
retrieval. Fig. 1 shows an overview of our retrieval
method, which we call IRCoT .2We begin by re-
trieving a base set of paragraphs using the question
as a query. Subsequently, we alternate between the
following two steps: (i) extend CoT : use the ques-
tion, the paragraphs collected thus far, and the CoT
sentences generated thus far to generate the next
CoT sentence; (ii) expand retrieved information :
use the last CoT sentence as a query to retrieve
additional paragraphs to add to the collected set.
We repeat these steps till the CoT reports an an-
swer or we reach the maximum allowed number
of reasoning steps. Upon termination, all collected
paragraphs are returned as the retrieval outcome.
Finally, we use these as the context for answering
the question via direct QA prompting (Brown et al.,
2020) or CoT prompting (Wei et al., 2022).
We evaluate the efficacy of our system
on 4 multi-step reasoning datasets under an
open-domain setting: HotpotQA (Yang et al.,
2018), 2WikiMultihopQA (Ho et al., 2020),
MuSiQue (Trivedi et al., 2022), and IIRC (Fer-
guson et al., 2020). Our experiments using OpenAI
GPT3 ( code-davinci-002 ) (Brown et al., 2020;
Ouyang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021) demon-
2Interleaved R etrieval guided by C hain-o f-Thought.strate that retrieval using IRCoT is substantially
more effective than the baseline, one-step, question-
based retrieval by 11-21 recall points under a fixed-
budget optimal recall setup.3When IRCoT is used
in conjunction with a prompting-based reader, it
also leads to substantial improvement (up to 15 F1
points) in downstream few-shot QA performance
and reduces factual errors in generated CoT by
up to 50%. Our approach also works on much
smaller Flan-T5 models (11B, 3B, and 0.7B) show-
ing similar trends. In particular, we find QA using
Flan-T5-XL (3B) with IRCoT even outperforms
the 58X larger GPT3 with a one-step question-
based retrieval. Furthermore, these improvements
also hold up in an out-of-distribution (OOD) setting
where the demonstrations from one dataset are used
when testing on another dataset. Lastly, we note
that our QA scores exceed those reported by recent
works on few-shot prompting for open-domain QA
(ODQA) (Khot et al., 2023; Press et al., 2022; Yao
et al., 2022), although a fair apples-to-apples com-
parison with them isn’t possible (cf. Appendix C).
In summary, our main contribution is a novel re-
trieval method, IRCoT , that leverages LMs’ chain-
of-thought generation capabilities to guide retrieval
and uses retrieval in turn to improve CoT reasoning.
We demonstrate that IRCoT :
1.improves both retrieval and few-shot QA per-
formance on several multi-step open-domain
QA datasets, in both IID and OOD settings;
2.reduces factual errors in generated CoTs; and
3.improves performance with both large-scale
(175B models) as well as smaller-scale mod-
els (Flan-T5-*, ≤11B) without any training.
2 Related Work
Prompting for Open-Domain QA. LLMs can
learn various tasks by simply using a few exam-
ples as prompts (Brown et al., 2020). They’ve
also been shown to answer complex questions
by producing step-by-step reasoning (chain-of-
thoughts, or CoT) when prompted with a few or
zero demonstrations (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al.,
2022). Prompting has been applied to open-domain
QA (Lazaridou et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2022; Yu
et al., 2023) but its value in improving retrieval and
QA for multi-step open-domain questions remains
relatively underexplored.
3We explain later (in the Metric section and Footnote 7)
the appropriateness of this metric in our setting as opposed to
more mainstream information recall metrics.
Recently three approaches have been proposed
for multi-step open-domain QA. SelfAsk (Press
et al., 2022) prompts LLMs to decompose a ques-
tion into subquestions and answers subquestions by
a call to Google Search API. DecomP (Khot et al.,
2023) is a general framework that decomposes a
task and delegates sub-tasks to appropriate sub-
models. They also decompose questions but dele-
gate retrieval to a BM25-based retriever. Both of
these approaches are not developed for CoT reason-
ing, do not focus on the retrieval problem, and re-
quire a single-hop QA model to answer the decom-
posed questions. Recently proposed ReAct (Yao
et al., 2022) system frames the problem as generat-
ing a sequence of reasoning and action steps. These
steps are much more complex, rely on much larger
models (PaLM-540B), and require fine-tuning to
outperform CoT for multi-step ODQA. Further-
more, none of these works have been shown to be
effective for smaller models without any training.
While a direct comparison with these approaches is
not straightforward (difference in knowledge cor-
pus, LLMs, examples), we find that our ODQA
performance is much higher than all their reported
numbers where available (§5).
Supervised Multi-Step Open-Domain QA.
Prior work has explored iterative retrieval for
open-domain QA in a fully supervised setting. Das
et al. (2019) proposes an iterative retrieval model
that retrieves using a neural query representation
and then updates it based on a reading compre-
hension model’s output. Feldman and El-Yaniv
(2019) apply similar neural query reformulation
idea for multihop open-domain QA. Xiong et al.
(2021) extends the widely-used Dense Passage
Retrieval (DPR) (Karpukhin et al., 2020) to
multihop setting, which has since been improved
by Khattab et al. (2021). Asai et al. (2020)
leverages the graph structure induced by the entity
links present in Wikipedia paragraphs to perform
iterative multi-step retrieval. GoldEn (Gold Entity)
retriever (Qi et al., 2019) iteratively generates
text queries based on paragraphs retrieved from
an off-the-shelf retriever but requires training
data for this next query generator. Nakano et al.
(2021) used GPT3 to answer long-form questions
by interacting with the browser but relied on
human annotations of these interactions. All of
these methods rely on supervised training on a
large-scale dataset and can not be easily extended
to a few-shot setting.3 Chain-of-Thought-Guided Retrieval
and Open-Domain QA
Our goal is to answer a knowledge-intensive multi-
step reasoning question Qin a few-shot setting
by using a knowledge source containing a large
number of documents. To do this we follow a
retrieve-and-read paradigm (Zhu et al., 2021),
where the retriever first retrieves documents from
the knowledge source and the QA model reads the
retrieved documents and the question to generate
the final answer. Our contribution is mainly in the
retrieve step (§3.1), and we use standard prompt-
ing strategies for the read step (§3.2).
As noted earlier, for multi-step reasoning, re-
trieval can help guide the next reasoning step,
which in turn can inform what to retrieve next. This
motivates our interleaving strategy, discussed next.
3.1 Interleaving Retrieval with
Chain-of-Thought Reasoning
Our proposed retriever method, IRCoT , can be
instantiated from the following three ingredients:
(i) a base retriever that can take a query and re-
turn a given number of paragraphs from a corpus
or knowledge source; (ii) a language model with
zero/few-shot Chain-of-Thought (CoT) generation
capabilities; and (iii) a small number of annotated
questions with reasoning steps explaining how to
arrive at the answer in natural language (chain of
thoughts) and a set of paragraphs from the knowl-
edge source that collectively support the reasoning
chain and the answer.
The overview of IRCoT is given in Fig. 2. We
first gather a base set of paragraphs by retrieving K
paragraphs using the question Qas the query. Then,
we interleave two steps ( reason andretrieve )
iteratively until the termination criterion is met.
Theretrieval-guided reasoning step (“Rea-
son”) generates the next CoT sentence using the
question, the paragraphs collected thus far, and
the CoT sentences generated thus far. The prompt
template for the task looks as follows:
Wikipedia Title: <Page Title>
<Paragraph Text>
...
Wikipedia Title: <Page Title>
<Paragraph Text>
Q: <Question>
A: <CoT-Sent-1> ... <CoT-Sent-n>
For in-context demonstrations, we use the com-
plete CoT in the above format. For a test instance,
Who wrote the 1970 international hit song that Murray Head is most recognized for?
The 1970 international hit song that
Murray Head is most recognized for
is "Super Star"
"Super Star" was written by
Andrew Lloyd W ebber and Tim Rice.
So the answer is:
Andrew Lloyd W ebber and Tim Rice.Retrieve (Q) →
Retrieve (T1)  → 
Retrieve (T2)  → T1 ← Reason (Q,      ,       )
T2 ← Reason (Q,      +     , T1)
T3 ← Reason (Q,      +      +     , T1+T2)
T1Q
T2
T3
Stop
+ +IRCoT
Interleaved Retrieval guided
by Chain-of-Thought ReasoningRetrieve(         )
Wikipedia Title: Mack Rides
Mack Rides GmbH & Co KG, also ...
Q: In what country was
Lost Gravity manufactured?
A: The Lost Gravity was manufactured by Mack
Rides. Mack Rides is a company from
Germany . The answer is Germany .
...
Wikipedia Title: Murray Head
Murray Seafield St George Head ..
...
Wikipedia Title: Most Beautifullest Hits
The Most Beautifullest Hits is ...
Q: Who wrote the 1970 international hit ..
A: The 1970 international hit song that
Murray Head is most recognized for
is "Super Star". "Super Star" was written
by. Andrew Lloyd W ebber and Tim Rice.q
Reason(        ,        ,         ) Q
 T1
Q
T1q
Figure 2: IRCoT interleaves chain-of-thought (CoT) generation and retrieval steps to guide the retrieval by CoT and
vice-versa. We start by retrieving Kdocuments using the question as they query and repeat two steps alternatingly
until termination. (i) reason -step generates next CoT sentence based on the question, so far retrieved paragraphs,
and CoT sentences. (ii) retrieve -step retrieves Kmore paragraphs based on the last CoT sentence. The process
terminates when the generated CoT has “answer is” or the number of steps exceeds a threshold. The collection of
all paragraphs is returned as the retrieval result on the termination.
we show the model only the CoT sentences gen-
erated thus far and let it complete the rest. Even
though the model may output multiple sentences,
for each reason-step , we only take the first gen-
erated sentence and discard the rest.
For the paragraphs in the in-context demonstra-
tions, we use ground-truth supporting paragraphs
andMrandomly sampled paragraphs shuffled and
concatenated together in the above format. For a
test instance, we show all the paragraphs collected
thus far across all the previous retrieve-step s.
If the generated CoT sentence has the “answer
is:” string or the maximum number of steps4has
been reached, we terminate the process and return
all collected paragraphs as the retrieval result.
TheCoT-guided retrieval step (“Retrieve”)
uses the last generated CoT sentence as a query
to retrieve more paragraphs and adds them to the
collected paragraphs. We cap the total number of
collected paragraphs5so as to fit in at least a few
demonstrations in the model’s context limit.
3.2 Question Answering Reader
The QA reader answers the question using retrieved
paragraphs taken from the retriever. We consider
4set to 8 in our experiments.
5set to 15 in our experiments.two versions of the QA reader implemented via two
prompting strategies: CoT Prompting as proposed
by Wei et al. (2022), Direct Prompting as proposed
by Brown et al. (2020). For CoT prompting, we use
the same template as shown in §3.2, but at test time
we ask the model to generate the full CoT from
scratch. The final sentence of CoT is expected to
be of the form “answer is: ...”, so that the answer
can be extracted programmatically. If it’s not in
that form, the full generation is returned as the
answer. For Direct Prompting, we use the same
template as CoT Prompting but the answer field
(“A: ”) contains only the final answer instead of
CoT. See App. G for details.
4 Experimental Setup
We evaluate our method on 4 multi-step
QA datasets in the open-domain setting:
HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018), 2WikiMul-
tihopQA (Ho et al., 2020), answerable subset of
MuSiQue (Trivedi et al., 2022), and answerable
subset of IIRC (Ferguson et al., 2020). For
HotpotQA, we use the Wikipedia corpus that
comes with it for the open-domain setting. For
each of the other three datasets, which originally
come in a reading comprehension or mixed setting,
we used the associated contexts to construct a
corpus for our open-domain setting (see App. A
for details). For each dataset, we use 100 randomly
sampled questions from the original development
set for tuning hyperparameters, and 500 other
randomly sampled questions as our test set.
4.1 Models
Retriever. We use BM25 (Robertson et al., 2009)
implemented in Elasticsearch6as our base retriever.
We compare two retriever systems:
(i)One-step Retriever (OneR) uses the ques-
tion as a query to retrieve Kparagraphs. We select
K∈ {5,7,9,11,13,15}that’s best on the dev set.
(ii)IRCoT Retriever is our method de-
scribed in §3. We use BM25 as its underly-
ing retriever and experiment with OpenAI GPT3
(code-davinci-002 ) (Brown et al., 2020; Ouyang
et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021) and Flan-T5 (Chung
et al., 2022) of different sizes as its CoT generator.
For demonstrating in-context examples to these
LMs, we wrote CoTs for 20 questions for all the
datasets (see App. §G). We then create 3 demon-
stration (“training”) sets by sampling 15 questions
each for each dataset. For each experiment, we
search for the best hyperparameters for the dev set
using the first demonstration set and evaluate each
demonstration set on the test set using the selected
hyperparameters. We report the mean and standard
deviation of these 3 results for each experiment.
At test time, we pack as many demonstrations
as possible within the model’s context length limit.
The context limit for GPT3 ( code-davinci-002 )
is 8K word pieces. Flan-T5-* doesn’t have any
hard limit as it uses relative position embeddings.
But we limit Flan-T5’s context to 6K word pieces,
which is the maximum we could fit in the memory
of our 80G A100 GPUs.
IRCoT Retriever has one key hyperparameter:
K∈ {2,4,6,8}, the number of paragraphs to re-
trieve at each step. Additionally, when creating
“training” demonstrations for IRCoT ’s Reasoner
module, we use gold paragraphs and a smaller num-
berM∈ {1,2,3}of distractor paragraphs (§3.1).
Retrieval Metric: We allow a maximum of 15
paragraphs for all retriever systems and measure
the recall of the gold paragraphs among the re-
trieved set of paragraphs. We search for the hyper-
parameter K(andMforIRCoT ) that maximizes
the recall on the dev set and use it on the test set.
6https://www.elastic.co/The reported metric can thus be viewed as the fixed-
budget optimal recall for each system considered.7
QA Reader. To implement the reader, we use
the same LMs as used in the reason-step of
IRCoT Retriever. We found that QA readers im-
plemented with Flan-T5-* perform better with the
Direct Prompting strategy and GPT3 performs bet-
ter with CoT Prompting strategy (see App. E).
Hence we use Direct prompting strategy for QA
with Flan-T5-* and CoT with GPT3 for the experi-
ments.8
The QA reader has one hyperparameter M: the
number of distractor paragraphs in the in-context
demonstrations. We search for Min{1,2,3}.
When used in conjunction with IRCoT retriever
Mis tied for the CoT generator and the reader.
Open-Domain QA (ODQA) Models. Putting re-
trievers and readers together, we experiment with
ODQA models constructed from the various lan-
guage models denoted as OneR QA andIRCoT
QA. For IRCoT QA, the choice of LM for the CoT
generator and the reader is kept the same. We also
experiment with retriever-less QA readers NoR QA
to assess how well LMs can answer the question
from their parametric knowledge alone. To select
the best hyperparameters for the ODQA model,
we search for the hyperparameters KandMthat
maximize the answer F1 on the development set.
IIRC is structured slightly differently from the
other datasets, in that its questions are grounded
in a main passage and other supporting paragraphs
come from the Wikipedia pages of entities men-
tioned in this passage. We slightly modify the re-
trievers and readers to account for this (see App. B).
5 Results
IRCoT retrieval is better than one-step. Fig. 3
compares OneR with IRCoT retrievers made from
7Note that our retrieved documents are not ranked, mak-
ing standard information retrieval metrics such as MAP and
DCG inapplicable. Further, we can only limit the number of
retrieved paragraphs per step toK. Since the total number
of reasoning steps varies for questions, and in some cases,
we don’t even obtain all Kparagraphs in a given step, the
total number of retrieved paragraphs also varies (even though
capped at 15). This makes Recall@k, Precision@k, etc., also
not applicable as metrics for any given k.
8IRCoT , by construction, produces a CoT as a part of its
retrieval process. Thus, instead of having a separate post-hoc
reader, one can also just extract the answer from the CoT
generated during retrieval. However, we found this to be a
suboptimal choice, so we always use a separate reader (see
App. F).
Figure 3: Retrieval recall for one-step retriever (OneR) and IRCoT instantiated from Flan-T5-XXL (left) and GPT3
(right) models. IRCoT outperforms OneR for both models and all datasets.
Figure 4: Answer F1 for ODQA model made using (i) no retriever (NoR QA) (ii) one-step retriever (OneR QA) and
(iii)IRCoT QA instantiated from Flan-T5-XXL (left) and GPT3 (right) models. IRCoT QA outperforms OneR QA
and NoR QA for both models on all datasets, except for GPT3 on IIRC.
Flan-T5-XXL andGPT3 LMs. For both models,
IRCoT significantly outperforms one-step retrieval
across all datasets. For Flan-T5-XXL ,IRCoT im-
proves our recall metric relative to one-step re-
trieval, on HotpotQA by 7.9, on 2WikiMultihopQA
by 14.3, on MuSiQue by 3.5, and on IIRC by 10.2
points. For GPT3 , this improvement is by 11.3, 22.6,
12.5, and 21.2 points, respectively.
IRCoT QA outperforms NoR and OneR QA.
Fig. 4 compares ODQA performance using
NoR, OneR and IRCoT retriever made from
Flan-T5-XXL andGPT3 LMs. For Flan-T5-XXL ,
IRCoT QA outperforms OneR QA on HotpotQA
by 9.4, on 2WikiMultihopQA by 15.3, on MuSiQue
by 5.0 and IIRC by 2.5 F1 points. For GPT3 , the
corresponding numbers (except for IIRC) are 7.1,
13.2, and 7.1 F1 points. For GPT3 ,IRCoT doesn’t
improve the QA score on IIRC, despite signifi-
cantly improved retrieval (21 points as shown in
Fig. 3). This is likely because IIRC relevant knowl-
edge may already be present in GPT3, as also ev-
idenced by its NoR QA score being similar. For
other datasets and model combinations, NoR QA ismuch worse than IRCoT QA, indicating the limits
of the models’ parametric knowledge.
IRCoT is effective in OOD setting. Since CoT
may not always be easy to write for new datasets,
we evaluate NoR, OneR, and IRCoT on generaliza-
tion to new datasets, i.e. OOD setting. To do so,
we use prompt demonstrations from one dataset to
evaluate on another dataset.9For all pairs of the
datasets10and for both Flan-T5-XXL andGPT3 , we
find the same trend as in the IID setting: IRCoT re-
trieval outperforms OneR (Fig. 5), and IRCoT QA
outperforms both OneR QA and NoR QA (Fig. 6).
IRCoT generates CoT with fewer factual errors.
To assess whether our approach also improves the
factuality of generated CoTs, we manually anno-
tated CoTs generated by NoR QA, OneR QA, and
IRCoT QA using GPT3 for 40 randomly sampled
questions from each of the four datasets. We con-
sidered CoT to have a factual error if at least one
9We use the evaluation dataset’s corpus for retrieval.
10We skip IIRC in this exploration as the task is structured
a bit differently and requires special handling (see App. B).
Figure 5: Retrieval recall for OneR and IRCoT using Flan-T5-XXL (Left) and GPT3 (Right) in out-of-distribution
(OOD) setting. HQ (HotpotQA), 2W (2WikiMultihopQA), MQ (MuSiQue). The result X →Y indicates prompt
demonstrations are from dataset X and evaluation is on dataset Y . IRCoT outperforms OneR in such an OOD setting.
Figure 6: Answer F1 for NoR QA, OneR QA and IRCoT QA using Flan-T5-XXL (Left) and GPT3 (Right) in
out-of-distribution (OOD) setting. HQ (HotpotQA), 2W (2WikiMultihopQA), MQ (MuSiQue). The result X →Y
indicates prompt demonstrations are from dataset X and evaluation is on dataset Y . IRCoT QA outperforms OneR
QA and NoR QA in such OOD setting.
Figure 7: Number of questions, out of 40, where CoT
generated by GPT3 using different methods has at least
1 factual error. Factual errors: IRCoT <OneR<NoR.
of the facts11is not true.12As Fig. 7 shows, NoR
makes the most factual errors, OneR makes fewer,
11all sentences before the final “answer is:” sentence.
12Note that factual error doesn’t necessarily mean the pre-
dicted answer is incorrect and vice-versa. This is because the
model can generate a wrong answer despite all correct facts,
and vice-versa. We also account for the possibility of answer
annotation errors in the original datasets.andIRCoT the least. In particular, IRCoT reduces
the factual errors over OneR by 50% on HotpotQA
and 40% on 2WikiMultihopQA.
Table 2 illustrates how the CoT predictions for
different methods vary qualitatively. Since NoR
relies completely on parametric knowledge, it often
makes a factual error in the first sentence, which
derails the full CoT. OneR can retrieve relevant
information closest to the question and is less likely
to make such errors early on, but it still makes
errors later in the CoT. IRCoT, on the other hand,
is often able to prevent such errors in each step.
IRCoT is also effective for smaller models. To
see how effective IRCoT is at different LM sizes,
we show the scaling plots in Fig. 8.13We com-
pare the recall for OneR and IRCoT using Flan-T5
{base (0.2B), large (0.7B), XL (3B), XXL (11B)},
and GPT3 code-davinci-002 (175B). IRCoT
with even the smallest model (0.2B) is better than
13We skip IIRC here as the smaller models are not good at
identifying Wikipedia titles from a paragraph and a question
which is necessary for IIRC (see App. B).
Figure 8: Retrieval recall for OneR (bottom) and IRCoT (top) for LMs of increasing sizes: Flan-T5 {base (0.2B),
large (0.7B), XL (3B), XXL (11B)} and GPT3 (175B) on HotpotQA, 2WikiMultihopQA, MuSiQue. IRCoT
outperforms OneR for all model sizes, including the 0.3B model, and the difference roughly grows with model size.
Note: OneR doesn’t use LM in its retrieval and so has a fixed score.
Figure 9: Answer F1 for ODQA models made using OneR (bottom) and IRCoT (top) for LMs of increasing sizes:
Flan-T5 {base (0.2B), large (0.7B), XL (3B), XXL (11B)} and GPT3 (175B) on HotpotQA, 2WikiMultihopQA and
MuSiQue. IRCoT QA outperforms OneR QA for all model sizes except for the smallest, 0.3B. IRCoT with 3B
model even outperforms OneR with 58X larger GPT3 model showing the value of improved retrieval.
OneR, and the performance roughly improves with
the model size. This shows the CoT generation
capabilities of even small models can be leveraged
for improving retrieval. Furthermore, we show the
effect of model size on the QA score in Fig. 9. For
all sizes except the smallest (0.2B), we see IRCoT
QA is better than OneR QA. Moreover, IRCoT
with a 3B model even outperforms OneR and NoR
with a 58X larger 175B GPT3 model in all datasets.
IRCoT is SOTA for few-shot multistep ODQA.14
We compare IRCoT QA with five recent ap-
proaches to using LLMs for ODQA: Internet-
Augmented QA (Lazaridou et al., 2022), RE-
CITE (Sun et al., 2022) ReAct (Yao et al., 2022),
SelfAsk (Press et al., 2022), and DecomP (Khot
et al., 2022). Although these are not head-to-head
comparisons as different methods use different
APIs, knowledge sources, and even LLMs (see
App. C for details), it is still informative to ex-
plore, in a leaderboard-style fashion, how IRCoT
performs relative to the best numbers published for
these recent systems.
14App. §C reports updated SOTA numbers, including con-
temporaneous and newer works.Model HpQABrHpQA 2WikiMQA MQ2H
InterAug −|− 30.3 |− − |− − |−
RECITE −|− 37.1 | 48.4 −|− − |−
ReAct −|− 35.1 |− − |− − |−
SelfAsk −|− − |− 40.1 |− 15.2 |−
DecomP −| 50.0 −|− − | 59.3 −|−
IRCoT QA45.8 | 58.5 49.3 | 60.7 57.7 | 68.0 34.2 | 43.8
Table 1: Comparison with other LLM-based ODQA
systems on EM and F1 scores. ‘ −’: score is unavail-
able. HpQABr: Bridge questions subset of HotpotQA.
MQ2H: MuSiQue 2-hop questions. IRCoT QA with
GPT3 (ours) outperforms other systems by a large mar-
gin. Note: Comparisons aren’t head-to-head as dis-
cussed in the text. App. §C reports updated SOTA num-
bers, including contemporaneous and newer works.
As shown in Table 1, IRCoT QA significantly
outperforms all of these recent systems by a large
margin, setting a new state of the art in terms of
what’s achievable via retrieval-augmented LLMs
(without supervised training).
6 Conclusions
Chain-of-thought prompting has significantly im-
proved LLMs’ ability to perform multi-step reason-
Question Gold Facts NoR QA OneR QA IRCoT QAHotpotQAThe tap dancing
soloist in My
Feet Keep
Dancing also
starred in what
1935 MGM
musical?⇒The tap dancing
soloist in My Feet
Keep Dancing is Fayard
Nicholas.
⇒ Fayard Nicholas
starred in the 1935
MGM musical An
All-Colored Vaudeville
Show.The tap dancing soloist
in My Feet Keep Danc-
ing is Eleanor Pow-
ell. Eleanor Powell
also starred in the 1935
MGM musical Broad-
way Melody of 1936.
So the answer is: Broad-
way Melody of 1936.The tap dancing soloist
in My Feet Keep Danc-
ing is Fayard Nicholas.
Fayard Nicholas also
starred in the 1935
MGM musical Top Hat.
So the answer is: Top
Hat.The tap dancing soloist
in My Feet Keep Danc-
ing is Fayard Nicholas.
Fayard Nicholas starred
in the 1935 MGM mu-
sical An All-Colored
Vaudeville Show. So
the answer is: An
All-Colored Vaudeville
Show.2WikiMQAWho is the
father-in-law
of Queen Hyo-
jeong?⇒ Queen Hyojeong
is the wife of King
Heonjong of Joseon.
⇒ King Heonjong
of Joseon is the son
of Crown Prince Hy-
omyeong.Queen Hyojeong has a
husband named King
Gojong. King Gojong
has a father named
Heungseon Daewongun.
Thus, Queen Hyojeong
has a father-in-law
named Heungseon
Daewongun. So the
answer is: Heungseon
Daewongun.Queen Hyojeong is the
wife of King Heonjong
of Joseon. King Heon-
jong of Joseon is the
son of King Sejo of
Joseon. Thus, King Sejo
of Joseon is the father-
in-law of Queen Hyo-
jeong. So the answer is:
King Sejo of Joseon.Queen Hyojeong is the
wife of King Heonjong
of Joseon. King Heon-
jong of Joseon is the son
of Crown Prince Hy-
omyeong. Thus, Crown
Prince Hyomyeong is
the father-in-law of
Queen Hyojeong. So
the answer is: Crown
Prince Hyomyeong.MuSiQueWhat is the
name of the
castle in the
city where the
performer of
A Collection
1984–1989 was
born?⇒ A Collection
1984–1989 was per-
formed by Jane Siberry.
⇒Jane Siberry was
born in Toronto.
⇒The castle in Toronto
is the Casa Loma.The performer of A Col-
lection 1984–1989 is
The The. The The was
born in London. The
name of the castle in
London is the Tower of
London. So the answer
is: the Tower of Lon-
don.A Collection
1984–1989 was
performed by Jane
Siberry. Jane Siberry
was born in Toronto.
The castle in Toronto
is Peqin Castle. So the
answer is: Peqin Castle.A Collection
1984–1989 was
performed by Jane
Siberry. Jane Siberry
was born in Toronto.
The castle in Toronto is
the Casa Loma. So the
answer is: Casa Loma.
Table 2: Example CoTs generated by GPT3 with different methods. Since NoR relies on parametric knowledge, it
often makes a factual error in the first sentence derailing the full CoT. OneR can retrieve relevant information closest
to the question and is less likely to make such errors early on, but it still makes errors later in the CoT. As IRCoT
performs retrieval after each step, it is often able to prevent such errors in each step. More examples are in App. D.
ing. We leveraged this ability to improve retrieval,
and in turn, improve QA performance for com-
plex knowledge-intensive open-domain tasks in a
few-shot setting. We argued that one-step question-
based retrieval is insufficient for such tasks, and
introduced IRCoT , which uses interleaved CoT rea-
soning and retrieval steps that guide each other
step-by-step. On four datasets, IRCoT significantly
improves both retrieval and QA performance when
compared to one-step retrieval, for both large and
relatively smaller-scale LMs. Additionally, CoTs
generated by IRCoT contain fewer factual errors.
Limitations
IRCoT relies on the base LM to have a zero or
few-shot CoT-generation ability. While this is com-
monly available in large LMs (over 100B), it’s not
as common for small LMs (under 20B), which to
some extent limits IRCoT adoptability. Given the
recent surge of interest (Tay et al., 2023; Magis-
ter et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022), however, smallerLMs will likely increasingly acquire such ability,
making IRCoT compatible with many more LMs.
IRCoT also relies on the base LM to support
long inputs as multiple retrieved paragraphs need
to fit in the LM’s input, in addition to at least
a few demonstrations of QA or CoT with para-
graphs. This was supported by the models we used
ascode-davinci-002 (GPT3) allows 8K tokens
and Flan-T5-* uses relative position embeddings
making it as extensible as the GPU memory con-
straints allow. Future work can explore strategies to
rerank and select the retrieved paragraphs instead
of passing all of them to the LM to alleviate the
need for the LM to support long input.
The performance gain of IRCoT retriever and
QA (over OneR and ZeroR baselines) come with
an additional computational cost. This is because
IRCoT makes a separate call to an (L)LM for each
sentence of CoT. Future work can focus on, for
instance, dynamically deciding when to retrieve
more information and when to perform additional
reasoning with the current information.
Lastly, a portion of our experiments was carried
out using a commercial LLM API from OpenAI
(code-davinci-002 ). This model was deprecated
by OpenAI after our submission making the repro-
duction of these experiments challenging despite
our best efforts, just like any other work using such
APIs. The trends discussed in the paper ( IRCoT
>OneR >NoR), we believe, would still hold.
Additionally, all our experiments using Flan-T5-*,
which exhibit similar trends as that of GPT3, will
remain reproducible, thanks to its publicly avail-
able model weights.
Ethical Considerations
Language models are known to hallucinate incor-
rect and potentially biased information. This is
especially problematic when the questions asked
to it are of a sensitive nature. While retrieval-
augmented approaches such as ours are expected
to alleviate this issue to some extent by grounding
generation in external text, this by no means solves
the problem of generating biased or offensive state-
ments. Appropriate care should thus be taken if
deploying such systems in user-facing applications.
All the datasets and models used in this work
are publicly available with permissible licenses.
HotpotQA has CC BY-SA 4.0 license15, 2Wiki-
MultihopQA has Apache-2.0 license16, MuSiQUe
and IIRC have CC BY 4.0 license17, and Flan-T5-*
models have Apache-2.0 license.
Acknowledgments
We thank the reviewers for their valuable feedback
and suggestions. We also thank OpenAI for provid-
ing access to the code-davinci-002 API. This ma-
terial is based on research supported in part by the
Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL), DARPA,
for the KAIROS program under agreement number
FA8750-19-2-1003, in part by the National Science
Foundation under the award IIS #2007290, and in
part by an award from the Stony Brook Trustees
Faculty Awards Program.
References
Akari Asai, Kazuma Hashimoto, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
Richard Socher, and Caiming Xiong. 2020. Learning
to retrieve reasoning paths over wikipedia graph for
15https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.
0/
16https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
17https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0question answering. In International Conference on
Learning Representations .
Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoff-
mann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Milli-
can, George Bm Van Den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste
Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, Diego
De Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Jacob Menick, Roman
Ring, Tom Hennigan, Saffron Huang, Loren Mag-
giore, Chris Jones, Albin Cassirer, Andy Brock,
Michela Paganini, Geoffrey Irving, Oriol Vinyals,
Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Jack Rae, Erich
Elsen, and Laurent Sifre. 2022. Improving language
models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In
Proceedings of the 39th International Conference
on Machine Learning , volume 162 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research , pages 2206–2240.
PMLR.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot
learners. Advances in neural information processing
systems , 33:1877–1901.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming
Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Ka-
plan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph,
Greg Brockman, et al. 2021. Evaluating large
language models trained on code. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2107.03374 .
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Bar-
ret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al.
2022. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416 .
Rajarshi Das, Shehzaad Dhuliawala, Manzil Zaheer,
and Andrew McCallum. 2019. Multi-step retriever-
reader interaction for scalable open-domain question
answering. In International Conference on Learning
Representations .
Yair Feldman and Ran El-Yaniv. 2019. Multi-hop para-
graph retrieval for open-domain question answering.
InProceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics , pages 2296–
2309, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
James Ferguson, Matt Gardner, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
Tushar Khot, and Pradeep Dasigi. 2020. IIRC: A
dataset of incomplete information reading compre-
hension questions. In EMNLP .
Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat,
and Mingwei Chang. 2020. Retrieval augmented
language model pre-training. In Proceedings of the
37th International Conference on Machine Learning ,
volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research , pages 3929–3938. PMLR.
Namgyu Ho, Laura Schmid, and Se-Young Yun. 2022.
Large language models are reasoning teachers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2212.10071 .
Xanh Ho, A. Nguyen, Saku Sugawara, and Akiko
Aizawa. 2020. Constructing a multi-hop qa dataset
for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps. In
COLING .
Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas
Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-
Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and Edouard
Grave. 2022. Atlas: Few-shot learning with re-
trieval augmented language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2208.03299 .
Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick
Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and
Wen-tau Yih. 2020. Dense passage retrieval for open-
domain question answering. In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 6769–6781,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jungo Kasai, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Yoichi Takahashi,
Ronan Le Bras, Akari Asai, Xinyan Yu, Dragomir
Radev, Noah A Smith, Yejin Choi, and Kentaro Inui.
2022. RealTime QA: What’s the answer right now?
arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.13332 .
Omar Khattab, Christopher Potts, and Matei Zaharia.
2021. Baleen: Robust multi-hop reasoning at scale
via condensed retrieval. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems .
Omar Khattab, Keshav Santhanam, Xiang Lisa Li,
David Hall, Percy Liang, Christopher Potts, and
Matei Zaharia. 2023. Demonstrate-search-predict:
Composing retrieval and language models for
knowledge-intensive NLP.
Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao Fu,
Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish Sabharwal.
2022. Decomposed prompting: A modular approach
for solving complex tasks.
Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao
Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish Sab-
harwal. 2023. Decomposed prompting: A modular
approach for solving complex tasks. In The Eleventh
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions .
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yu-
taka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large lan-
guage models are zero-shot reasoners. In ICML 2022
Workshop on Knowledge Retrieval and Language
Models .
Angeliki Lazaridou, Elena Gribovskaya, Wojciech
Stokowiec, and Nikolai Grigorev. 2022. Internet-
augmented language models through few-shot
prompting for open-domain question answering.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05115 .Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio
Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-
rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-
täschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020.
Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-
intensive nlp tasks. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 9459–
9474. Curran Associates, Inc.
Lucie Charlotte Magister, Jonathan Mallinson, Jakub
Adamek, Eric Malmi, and Aliaksei Severyn. 2022.
Teaching small language models to reason. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2212.08410 .
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu,
Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse,
Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders,
et al. 2021. WebGPT: Browser-assisted question-
answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.09332 .
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida,
Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Gray, John
Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller,
Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder,
Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022.
Training language models to follow instructions with
human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems .
Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt,
Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. 2022. Measuring
and narrowing the compositionality gap in language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03350 .
Peng Qi, Xiaowen Lin, Leo Mehr, Zijian Wang, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2019. Answering complex
open-domain questions through iterative query gen-
eration. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages
2590–2602, Hong Kong, China. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Stephen Robertson, Hugo Zaragoza, et al. 2009. The
probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25 and be-
yond. Foundations and Trends ®in Information Re-
trieval , 3(4):333–389.
Zhiqing Sun, Xuezhi Wang, Yi Tay, Yiming Yang, and
Denny Zhou. 2022. Recitation-augmented language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01296 .
Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Vinh Q. Tran, Xavier Garcia,
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Hyung Won Chung, Dara
Bahri, Tal Schuster, Steven Zheng, Denny Zhou, Neil
Houlsby, and Donald Metzler. 2023. UL2: Unifying
language learning paradigms. In The Eleventh Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations .
Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot,
and Ashish Sabharwal. 2022. MuSiQue: Multi-
hop questions via single-hop question composition.
TACL , 10:539–554.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V Le,
and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain of thought prompt-
ing elicits reasoning in large language models. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .
Wenhan Xiong, Xiang Li, Srini Iyer, Jingfei Du, Patrick
Lewis, William Yang Wang, Yashar Mehdad, Scott
Yih, Sebastian Riedel, Douwe Kiela, and Barlas
Oguz. 2021. Answering complex open-domain ques-
tions with multi-hop dense retrieval. In International
Conference on Learning Representations .
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Ben-
gio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2018. HotpotQA: A dataset
for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answer-
ing. In EMNLP .
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak
Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2022.
ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 .
Wenhao Yu, Dan Iter, Shuohang Wang, Yichong Xu,
Mingxuan Ju, Soumya Sanyal, Chenguang Zhu,
Michael Zeng, and Meng Jiang. 2023. Generate
rather than retrieve: Large language models are
strong context generators. In The Eleventh Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations .
Fengbin Zhu, Wenqiang Lei, Chao Wang, Jianming
Zheng, Soujanya Poria, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2021.
Retrieving and reading: A comprehensive survey on
open-domain question answering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.00774 .
A Constructing Retrieval Corpora
HotpotQA already comes with the associated
Wikipedia corpus for the open-domain setting,
so we use it directly. 2WikiMultihopQA and
MuSiQue, however, are originally reading com-
prehension datasets. Questions in 2WikiMulti-
hopQA and MuSiQue are associated with 10 and 20
paragraphs respectively, 2-4 of which are support-
ing and others are non-supporting. To turn these
datasets into an open-domain setting, we make two
corpora, one for each dataset, by combining all
supporting and non-supporting paragraphs for all
its questions in the train, development, and test
sets. IIRC is originally a mix between reading
comprehension and an open-domain setting. Each
question is grounded in one main paragraph, which
contains links to multiple Wikipedia pages with
several paragraphs each. We create a corpus out
of all the paragraphs from all the Wikipedia pages
present in the dataset.18We do assume the avail-
ability of the main passage which doesn’t need
to be retrieved and is always present. We don’t
assume the availability of Wikipedia links in the
main passage, however, to keep the retrieval prob-
lem challenging.19
B Special Handling of Models for IIRC
IIRC is slightly different from the other datasets,
in that the question is grounded in the main pas-
sage and other supporting paragraphs come from
the Wikipedia pages of entities mentioned in this
passage. We modify the retrievers and readers to
account for this difference: (i) We always keep the
main passage as part of the input to the model re-
gardless of the retrieval strategy used. (ii) For all
the retrieval methods, we first prompt the model to
generate a list of Wikipedia page titles using the
main passage and the question. We map these gen-
erated titles to the nearest Wikipedia page titles in
the corpus (found using BM25), and then the rest
of the paragraph retrieval queries are scoped within
only those Wikipedia pages.
To prompt the model to generate Wikipedia page
titles using the main passage and the question for
18Following are the corpus sizes for the datasets: Hot-
potQA (5,233,329), 2WikiMultihopQA (430,225), MuSiQue
(139,416), and IIRC (1,882,415)
19IIRC corpus has a positional bias, i.e., the majority of sup-
porting paragraphs are always within the first few positions of
the Wikipedia page. To keep the retrieval problem challenging
enough we shuffle the paragraphs before indexing the corpus,
i.e., we don’t use positional information in any way.IIRC, we use the following template.
Wikipedia Title: <Main Page Title>
<Main Paragraph Text>
Q: The question is: '<Question> '. Generate titles
of <N> Wikipedia pages that have relevant
information to answer this question.
A: ["<Title-1>", "<Title-2>", ...]
For “training”, i.e., for demonstrations, N ( ≤3)
is the number of supporting Wikipedia page titles
for the question. At test time, since the number
of supporting page titles is unknown, we use a
fixed value of 3. We found this trick of prompting
the model to generate more titles at the test time
improves its recall over letting the model decide by
itself how many titles to generate.
C Comparison with Previous Systems for
ODQA with LLMs
We showed a leaderboard-style comparison with
previous approaches to using large language mod-
els for open-domain QA in § 5. We noted though
that the comparison is not head-to-head given vari-
ous differences. We briefly describe each method
and the differences in API, LLM, retrieval corpus,
and other choices here.
Internet-Augmented QA (Lazaridou et al., 2022)
does (one-step) Google Search retrieval, performs
additional LLM-based filtering on it, and then
prompts an LLM to answer the question using
the resulting context. It uses the Gopher 280B
language model. RECITE (Sun et al., 2022) by-
passes the retrieval and instead prompts an LLM
to first generate (recite) one or several relevant pas-
sages from its own memory, and generate the an-
swer conditioned on this generation. They exper-
iment with many LLMs, the highest performing
of which is code-davinci-002 which we report
here. ReAct (Yao et al., 2022) prompts LLMs to
produce reasoning and action traces where actions
are calls to a Wikipedia API to return the sum-
mary for a given Wikipedia page title. It uses
the PALM 540B model. SelfAsk (Press et al.,
2022) prompts LLMs to decompose a question
into subquestions and answers these subquestions
by issuing separate calls to the Google Search
API. It uses the GPT3 ( text-davinci-002 ) model.
Finally, DecomP (Khot et al., 2023) is a gen-
eral framework that decomposes a task and del-
egates sub-tasks to appropriate sub-models. Sim-
ilar to our system, it uses BM25 Search and the
GPT3 ( code-davinci-002 ) model. And lastly,
Model HpQABrHpQA 2WikiMQA MQ2HMQ
InterAug (Lazaridou et al., 2022) −|− 30.3 |− − |− − |− − |−
RECITE (Sun et al., 2022) −|− 37.1 | 48.4 −|− − |− − |−
ReAct (Yao et al., 2022) −|− 35.1 |− − |− − |− − |−
SelfAsk (Press et al., 2022) −|− − |− 40.1 |− 15.2 |− − |−
DecomP (Khot et al., 2022) −| 50.0 −|− − | 59.3 −|− − |−
DecomP (Khot et al., 2023) * −|− − | 53.5 −|70.8 −|− − | 30.9
DSP (Khattab et al., 2023) * −|− 51.4 | 62.9 −|− − |− − |−
IRCoT QA (ours) 45.8 | 58.5 49.3 | 60.7 57.7 | 68.0 34.2 | 43.8 26.5 | 36.5
Table 3: Extended comparison with published LLM-based ODQA systems (as of May 25, 2023) on EM and
F1 scores (with new numbers marked with *). ‘ −’: score is unavailable. HpQABr: Bridge questions subset of
HotpotQA. MQ2H: MuSiQue 2-hop questions. IRCoT remains SOTA for MuSiQue and is close to SOTA for
HotpotQA and 2WikiMultihopQA. Note the comparisons here are not head-to-head as discussed in the text.
Flan-T5-XXL GPT3
Model HotpotQA 2WikiMQA MuSiQue IIRC HotpotQA 2WikiMQA MuSiQue IIRC
ZeroR QADirect 25.3±0.3 32.7±0.3 13.7±0.328.9±0.3 41.0±1.1 38.5±1.1 19.0±1.2 40.9±0.7
CoT 22.9 ±0.1 31.7±1.5 10.3±0.5 24.4±0.1 47.5±0.4 41.2±1.0 25.2±1.252.1±0.1
OneR QADirect 49.7±0.5 51.2±0.3 25.8±0.640.0±1.3 50.7±0.1 46.4±2.9 20.4±0.3 40.1±0.9
CoT 43.1 ±0.7 47.8±0.9 17.6±0.2 34.5±1.5 53.6±0.7 54.8±2.1 29.4±0.849.8±2.3
IRCoT QADirect 59.1±0.9 66.5±1.4 30.8±0.242.5±2.1 60.6±1.0 63.5±2.7 36.0±0.5 47.9±2.3
CoT 52.0 ±0.6 55.1±1.0 24.9±1.0 36.5±1.3 60.7±1.1 68.0±1.5 36.5±1.249.9±1.1
Table 4: Answer F1 for different ODQA models made from NoR, One and IRCoT retrievals, and Direct and
CoT prompting readers. For Flan-T5-XXL , Direct prompting is a better choice for the reader, and for GPT3 , CoT
prompting is a better choice for the reader. Hence, we make different reader choices for Flan-T5 and GPT3 for the
experiments in the main paper. Note that IRCoT QA>OneR QA >ZeroR QA holds up regardless of this choice.
DSP (Khattab et al., 2023) provides a way to pro-
grammatically define interactions between LLM
and retrieval for ODQA (e.g., via question decom-
position), bootstrap demonstrations for such a pro-
gram, and use them to make the answer prediction.
It uses GPT3.5 LLM with ColBERT-based retrieval.
Since most of these methods use different knowl-
edge sources or APIs and are built using different
LLMs and retrieval models, it’s difficult to make a
fair scientific comparison across these systems. Ad-
ditionally, the evaluations in the respective papers
are on different random subsets (from the same
distribution) of test instances.
Despite these differences, it is still informative to
explore, in a leaderboard-style fashion, how IRCoT
performs relative to the best numbers published
for these recent systems. Table 3 shows results
from different systems, including contemporane-
ous and newer numbers. The two new systems in
this table (relative to Table 1) are DecomP (newer
version) and DSP. While IRCoT remains SOTA on
MuSiQue, DSP outperforms it on HotpotQA by 2.0
points and the newer version of Decomp outper-
forms IRCoT on 2WikiMultihopQA by 2.8 points.We speculate DecomP performs well on 2WikiMul-
tihopQA because it has only a few easy-to-predict
decomposition patterns, which DecomP’s question
decomposition can leverage. The lack of such pat-
terns in HotpotQA and MuSiQue causes it to un-
derperform compared to IRCoT . Lastly, it will be
useful to assess whether DSP, which is hardcoded
for 2-hop questions like that of HotpotQA, will
work well for a dataset with a varied number of
hops like that of MuSiQue. We leave this further
investigation to future work.
D Additional CoT Generation Examples
Table 5 provides illustrations, in addition to the
ones provided in Table 2, for how the CoT gen-
erations for NoR QA, OneR QA, and IRCoT QA
methods vary. This gives an insight into how IR-
CoT improves QA performance. Since NoR re-
lies completely on parametric knowledge, it often
makes a factual error in the first sentence, which de-
rails the full reasoning chain. Some of this factual
information can be fixed by OneR, especially infor-
mation closest to the question (i.e., can be retrieved
using the question). This is insufficient for fixing
Question Gold Facts NoR QA OneR QA IRCoT QAHotpotQAWhat was the
island, on
which Marinelli
Glacier is lo-
cated, formerly
known as?⇒Marinelli Glacier is
located on the island of
Tierra del Fuego.
⇒The island of Tierra
del Fuego was formerly
known as Isla de Xativa.Marinelli Glacier is
located on the island of
Graham Land. Graham
Land was formerly
known as Graham’s
Land. So the answer is:
Graham’s Land.Marinelli Glacier is lo-
cated on Isla Grande
de Tierra del Fuego.
Isla Grande de Tierra
del Fuego was formerly
known as Tierra del
Fuego. So the answer
is: Tierra del Fuego.Marinelli Glacier is lo-
cated on the island of
Tierra del Fuego. The is-
land of Tierra del Fuego
was formerly known as
Isla de Xativa. So the
answer is: Isla de Xa-
tiva.2WikiMQAWho is the
child of the
director of film
Mukhyamantri
(1996 Film)?⇒ The director of
Mukhyamantri (1996
film) is Anjan Choud-
hury.
⇒Anjan Choudhury
has a child named
Sandip Choudhury.The film Mukhyamantri
was directed by S. V . Ra-
jendra Singh Babu. S.
V . Rajendra Singh Babu
has a child named S.
V . Rajendra Singh Babu.
So the answer is: S. V .
Rajendra Singh Babu.Mukhyamantri (1996
film) was directed
by Anjan Choudhury.
Anjan Choudhury has a
child named Aniruddha
Choudhury. So the
answer is: Aniruddha
Choudhury.The director of Mukhya-
mantri (1996 film)
is Anjan Choudhury.
Anjan Choudhury has
a child named Sandip
Choudhury. So the
answer is: Sandip
Choudhury.MuSiQueWhen did the
Governorship
end of the
city where the
author of Sac-
erdotii Nostri
Primordia died?⇒Sacerdotii Nostri Pri-
mordia was written by
Pope John XXIII.
⇒Pope John XXIII
died in Vatican City.
⇒The Governorship of
Vatican City ended in
1952.The author of Sacer-
dotii Nostri Primordia is
Pope Pius IX. Pope Pius
IX died in the city of
Rome. The Governor-
ship of Rome ended in
1870. So the answer is:
1870.Sacerdotii Nostri Pri-
mordia was written by
Pope John XXIII. Pope
John XXIII died in the
city of Rome. The
Governorship of Rome
ended in 1870. So the
answer is: 1870.Sacerdotii Nostri Pri-
mordia was written by
Pope John XXIII. Pope
John XXIII died in Vat-
ican City. The Gover-
norship of Vatican City
ended in 1952. So the
answer is: 1952.
Table 5: Additional CoTs generated by GPT3 with different methods. ZeroR is most prone to factual errors. OneR
often fixes some of the factual information which is closest to the question but doesn’t always fix it all the way.
Since IRCoT retrieves after each step, it can also fix the errors at each step. More examples are in Table 2.
all the mistakes. Since IRCoT involves retrieval
after each step, it can fix errors at each step.
E Direct vs CoT Prompting Readers
Table 4 compares reader choice (Direct vs CoT
Prompting) for Flan-T5-XXL and GPT3. We find
that Flan-T5-XXL works better with Direct Prompt-
ing as a reader and GPT3 works better with CoT
Prompting as a reader. Therefore, for the experi-
ments in the main paper, we go with this choice.
Note though that the trends discussed in § 5 ( IRCoT
QA>OneR QA >ZeroR QA) hold regardless of
the choice of the reader.
F Separate Reader in IRCoT QA
IRCoT , by construction, produces a CoT as a part
of its retrieval process. So, instead of having a sep-
arate post-hoc reader, one can also just extract the
answer from the CoT generated during retrieval.
As Table 6 shows the effect of such an ablation.
ForFlan-T5-XXL having a separate reader is sig-
nificantly better. For GPT3, this is not always true,
but at least a model with a separate reader is al-
ways better or close to the one without. So overall
we go with the choice of using the reader for the
experiments in this paper.Model HotpotQA 2WikiMQA MuSiQue IIRCFlanIRCoT QA59.1±0.9 66.5±1.430.8±0.242.5±2.1
w/o reader 52.6 ±0.3 60.9±0.6 24.9±0.240.3±0.2GPT3IRCoT QA 60.7 ±1.1 68.0±1.536.5±1.249.9±1.1
w/o reader 61.0±0.7 70.4±1.5 31.5±0.648.4±1.0
Table 6: Answer F1 of IRCoT QA with and without
a separate reader for Flan-T5-XXL (top two rows) and
GPT3 (bottom two rows). When the reader is not used,
the answer is extracted from the CoT generated by
IRCoT while doing the retrieval. Ablating the reader
usually hurts the performance.
G Prompts
Our manually written chain-of-thought annotations
for HotpotQA, 2WikiMultihopQA, MuSiQue, and
IIRC are given in Listing 1, 2, 3 and 4 respec-
tively. Our prompts for GPT3 CoT Prompting are
the same as these, except they have Wikipipedia
paragraphs on the top of the questions as shown
in § 3.120. Our prompts for GPT3 Direct Prompt-
ing are the same as that of CoT prompting, except
have the answer after "A:" directly. Our prompts
for Flan-T5-* are slightly different from that of
GPT3. For CoT Prompting, we prefix the question
20We are not showing the paragraphs in the paper for brevity
but they can be obtained from the released code.
line: "Q: Answer the following question by reason-
ing step-by-step. <actual-question>". For Direct
Prompting, we prefix the question line: "Q: Answer
the following question. <actual-question>". We
did this to follow Flan-T5-*’s training format and
found it to help its CoT generation.
Listing 1: Chain-of-Thought annotations for HotpotQA.
Q: Jeremy Theobald and Christopher Nolan share what profession?
A: Jeremy Theobald is an actor and producer. Christopher Nolan is a director, producer, and screenwriter. Therefore, they
both share the profession of being a producer. So the answer is: producer.
Q: What film directed by Brian Patrick Butler was inspired by a film directed by F.W. Murnau?
A: Brian Patrick Butler directed the film The Phantom Hour. The Phantom Hour was inspired by the films such as Nosferatu
and The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari. Of these Nosferatu was directed by F.W. Murnau. So the answer is: The Phantom Hour.
Q: How many episodes were in the South Korean television series in which Ryu Hye−young played Bo−ra?
A: The South Korean television series in which Ryu Hye−young played Bo−ra is Reply 1988. The number of episodes Reply
1988 has is 20. So the answer is: 20.
Q: Vertical Limit stars which actor who also played astronaut Alan Shepard in "The Right Stuff"?
A: The actor who played astronaut Alan Shepard in "The Right Stuff" is Scott Glenn. The movie Vertical Limit also starred
Scott Glenn. So the answer is: Scott Glenn.
Q: What was the 2014 population of the city where Lake Wales Medical Center is located?
A: Lake Wales Medical Center is located in the city of Polk County, Florida. The population of Polk County in 2014 was
15,140. So the answer is: 15,140.
Q: Who was born first? Jan de Bont or Raoul Walsh?
A: Jan de Bont was born on 22 October 1943. Raoul Walsh was born on March 11, 1887. Thus, Raoul Walsh was born the
first. So the answer is: Raoul Walsh.
Q: In what country was Lost Gravity manufactured?
A: The Lost Gravity (roller coaster) was manufactured by Mack Rides. Mack Rides is a German company. So the answer is:
Germany.
Q: Which of the following had a debut album entitled "We Have an Emergency": Hot Hot Heat or The Operation M.D.?
A: The debut album of the band "Hot Hot Heat" was "Make Up the Breakdown". The debut album of the band "The Operation
M.D." was "We Have an Emergency". So the answer is: The Operation M.D..
Q: In which country did this Australian who was detained in Guantanamo Bay detention camp and published "Guantanamo:
My Journey" receive para−military training?
A: The Australian who was detained in Guantanamo Bay detention camp and published "Guantanamo: My Journey" is David
Hicks. David Hicks received his para−military training in Afghanistan. So the answer is: Afghanistan.
Q: Does The Border Surrender or Unsane have more members?
A: The Border Surrender band has following members: Keith Austin, Simon Shields, Johnny Manning and Mark Austin. That
is, it has 4 members. Unsane is a trio of 3 members. Thus, The Border Surrender has more members. So the answer is:
The Border Surrender.
Q: Which band formed first, Sponge Cola or Hurricane No. 1?
A: Sponge Cola band was formed in 1998. Hurricane No. 1 was formed in 1996. Thus, Hurricane No. 1 band formed the first.
So the answer is: Hurricane No. 1.
Q: James Paris Lee is best known for investing the Lee−Metford rifle and another rifle often referred to by what acronymn?
A: James Paris Lee is best known for investing the Lee−Metford rifle and Leeâ ˘A¸ SEnfield series of rifles. Leeâ ˘A¸ SEnfield is
often referred to by the acronym of SMLE. So the answer is: SMLE.
Q: Who was born first, James D Grant, who uses the pen name of Lee Child, or Bernhard Schlink?
A: James D Grant, who uses the pen name of Lee Child, was born in 1954. Bernhard Schlink was born in 1944. Thus,
Bernhard Schlink was born first. So the answer is: Bernhard Schlink.
Q: Which American neo−noir science fiction has Pierce Gagnon starred?
A: Pierce Gagnon has starred in One Tree Hill, Looper, Wish I Was Here and Extant. Of these, Looper is an American neo−
noir science fiction. So the answer is: Looper.
Q: What year did Edburga of Minster−in−Thanet's father die?
A: The father of Edburga of Minster−in−Thanet is King Centwine. Centwine died after 685. So the answer is: after 685.
Q: Were Lonny and Allure both founded in the 1990s?
A: Lonny (magazine) was founded in 2009. Allure (magazine) was founded in 1991. Thus, of the two, only Allure was
founded in 1990s. So the answer is: no.
Q: The actor that stars as Joe Proctor on the series "Power" also played a character on "Entourage" that has what last name?
A: The actor that stars as Joe Proctor on the series "Power" is Jerry Ferrara. Jerry Ferrara also played a character on Entourage
named Turtle Assante. Thus, Turtle Assante's last name is Assante. So the answer is: Assante.
Q: Nobody Loves You was written by John Lennon and released on what album that was issued by Apple Records, and was
written, recorded, and released during his 18 month separation from Yoko Ono?
A: The album issued by Apple Records, and written, recorded, and released during John Lennon's 18 month separation from
Yoko Ono is Walls and Bridges. Nobody Loves You was written by John Lennon on Walls and Bridges album. So the
answer is: Walls and Bridges.
Q: How many awards did the "A Girl Like Me" singer win at the American Music Awards of 2012?
A: The singer of "A Girl Like Me" singer is Rihanna. In the American Music Awards of 2012, Rihana won one award. So the
answer is: one.
Q: who is older Jeremy Horn or Renato Sobral ?
A: Jeremy Horn was born on August 25, 1975. Renato Sobral was born on September 7, 1975. Thus, Jeremy Horn is older. So
the answer is: Jeremy Horn.
Listing 2: Chain-of-Thought annotations for 2WikiMultihopQA.
Q: When did the director of film Hypocrite (Film) die?
A: The film Hypocrite was directed by Miguel Morayta. Miguel Morayta died on 19 June 2013. So the answer is: 19 June
2013.
Q: Do director of film Coolie No. 1 (1995 Film) and director of film The Sensational Trial have the same nationality?
A: Coolie No. 1 (1995 film) was directed by David Dhawan. The Sensational Trial was directed by Karl Freund. David
Dhawan's nationality is India. Karl Freund's nationality is Germany. Thus, they do not have the same nationality. So the
answer is: no.
Q: Are both Kurram Garhi and Trojkrsti located in the same country?
A: Kurram Garhi is located in the country of Pakistan. Trojkrsti is located in the country of Republic of Macedonia. Thus,
they are not in the same country. So the answer is: no.
Q: Who was born first out of Martin Hodge and Ivania Martinich?
A: Martin Hodge was born on 4 February 1959. Ivania Martinich was born on 25 July 1995. Thus, Martin Hodge was born
first. So the answer is: Martin Hodge.
Q: Which film came out first, The Night Of Tricks or The Genealogy?
A: The Night of Tricks was published in the year 1939. The Genealogy was published in the year 1979. Thus, The Night of
Tricks came out first. So the answer is: The Night Of Tricks.
Q: When did the director of film Laughter In Hell die?
A: The film Laughter In Hell was directed by Edward L. Cahn. Edward L. Cahn died on August 25, 1963. So the answer is:
August 25, 1963.
Q: Which film has the director died later, The Gal Who Took the West or Twenty Plus Two?
A: The film Twenty Plus Two was directed by Joseph M. Newman. The Gal Who Took the West was directed by Frederick de
Cordova. Joseph M. Newman died on January 23, 2006. Fred de Cordova died on September 15, 2001. Thus, the person
to die later from the two is Twenty Plus Two. So the answer is: Twenty Plus Two.
Q: Who is Boraqchin (Wife Of Ã ˝Ugedei)'s father−in−law?
A: Boraqchin is married to Ã ˝Ugedei Khan. Ã ˝Ugedei Khan's father is Genghis Khan. Thus, Boraqchin's father−in−law is
Genghis Khan. So the answer is: Genghis Khan.
Q: What is the cause of death of Grand Duke Alexei Alexandrovich Of Russia's mother?
A: The mother of Grand Duke Alexei Alexandrovich of Russia is Maria Alexandrovna. Maria Alexandrovna died from
tuberculosis. So the answer is: tuberculosis.
Q: Which film has the director died earlier, When The Mad Aunts Arrive or The Miracle Worker (1962 Film)?
A: When The Mad Aunts Arrive was directed by Franz Josef Gottlieb. The Miracle Worker (1962 film) was directed by
Arthur Penn. Franz Josef Gottlieb died on 23 July 2006. Arthur Penn died on September 28, 2010. Thus, of the two, the
director to die earlier is Franz Josef Gottlieb, who directed When The Mad Aunts Arrive. So the answer is: When The
Mad Aunts Arrive.
Q: Which album was released earlier, What'S Inside or Cassandra'S Dream (Album)?
A: What's Inside was released in the year 1995. Cassandra's Dream (album) was released in the year 2008. Thus, of the two,
the album to release earlier is What's Inside. So the answer is: What's Inside.
Q: Are both mountains, Serre Mourene and Monte Galbiga, located in the same country?
A: Serre Mourene is located in Spain. Monte Galbiga is located in Italy. Thus, the two countries are not located in the same
country. So the answer is: no.
Q: What is the date of birth of the director of film Best Friends (1982 Film)?
A: The film Best Friends was directed by Norman Jewison. Norman Jewison was born on July 21, 1926. So the answer is:
July 21, 1926.
Q: Which film has the director born first, Two Weeks With Pay or Chhailla Babu?
A: Two Weeks with Pay was directed by Maurice Campbell. Chhailla Babu was directed by Joy Mukherjee. Maurice
Campbell was born on November 28, 1919. Joy Mukherjee was born on 24 February 1939. Thus, from the two directors,
Chhailla Babu was born first, who directed Two Weeks With Pay. So the answer is: Two Weeks With Pay.
Q: Who is the grandchild of Krishna Shah (Nepalese Royal)?
A: Krishna Shah has a child named Rudra Shah. Rudra Shah has a child named Prithvipati Shah. Thus, Krishna Shah has a
grandchild named Prithvipati Shah. So the answer is: Prithvipati Shah.
Q: When was the director of film P.S. Jerusalem born?
A: P.S. Jerusalem was directed by Danae Elon. Danae Elon was born on December 23, 1970. So the answer is: December 23,
1970.
Q: Which album was released more recently, If I Have to Stand Alone or Answering Machine Music?
A: If I Have to Stand Alone was published in the year 1991. Answering Machine Music was released in the year 1999. Thus,
of the two, the album to release more recently is Answering Machine Music. So the answer is: Answering Machine
Music.
Q: Where did the director of film Maddalena (1954 Film) die?
A: The film Maddalena is directed by Augusto Genina. Augusto Genina died in Rome. So the answer is: Rome.
Q: When did the director of film The Boy And The Fog die?
A: The director of The Boy and the Fog is Roberto GavaldÃ¸ sn. Roberto GavaldÃ¸ sn died on September 4, 1986. So the answer
is: September 4, 1986.
Q: Are the directors of films The Sun of the Sleepless and Nevada (1927 film) both from the same country?
A: The director of Sun of the Sleepless is Temur Babluani. The director of Nevada (1927 film) is John Waters. John Waters is
from the country of America. Temur Babluani is from the country of Georgia. Thus, John Walters and Temur Babluani
are not from the same country. So the answer is: no.
Listing 3: Chain-of-Thought annotations for MuSiQue.
Q: When did the first large winter carnival take place in the city where CIMI−FM is licensed to broadcast?
A: CIMI−FM is licensed to broadcast in Quebec City. The first large winter carnival in Quebec City took place in 1894. So
the answer is: 1894.
Q: When was Neville A. Stanton's employer founded?
A: The employer of Neville A. Stanton is University of Southampton. The University of Southampton was founded in 1862.
So the answer is: 1862.
Q: What county is Hebron located in, in the same province the Heritage Places Protection Act applies to?
A: Heritage Places Protection Act applies to the jurisdiction of Prince Edward Island. Hebron, Prince Edward Island is located
in the Prince County. So the answer is: Prince County.
Q: What weekly publication in the Connecticut city with the most Zagat rated restaurants is issued by university of America−
Lite: How Imperial Academia Dismantled Our Culture's author?
A: The author of America−Lite: How Imperial Academia Dismantled Our Culture is David Gelernter. David Gelernter was
educated at the Yale University. The city in Connecticut that has the highest number of Zagat−rated restaurants is New
Haven. The weekly publication in New Haven that is issued by Yale University is Yale Herald. So the answer is: Yale
Herald.
Q: What is the headquarters for the organization who sets the standards for ISO 21500?
A: The standards for ISO 21500 were set by International Organization for Standardization. The International Organization
for Standardization has headquarters in Geneva. So the answer is: Geneva.
Q: What did the publisher of Banjo−Tooie rely primarily on for its support?
A: The publisher of Banjo−Tooie is Nintendo. Nintendo relied primarily for its support on first−party games. So the answer is:
first−party games.
Q: In which county was the birthplace of the Smoke in tha City performer?
A: The performer of Smoke in tha City is MC Eiht. MC Eiht's birthplace is Compton. Compton is located in the county of Los
Angeles County. So the answer is: Los Angeles County.
Q: What region of the state where Guy Shepherdson was born, contains SMA Negeri 68?
A: Guy Shepherdson was born in Jakarta. SMA Negeri 68 Jakarta is located in Central Jakarta. So the answer is: Central
Jakarta.
Q: When did Britain withdraw from the country containing Hoora?
A: Hoora is in the country of Bahrain. Britain withdrew from Bahrain in 1971. So the answer is: 1971.
Q: Where does the Snake River start, in the state where Lima Mountain is located?
A: Lima Mountain is located in the state of Minnesota. The snake river in Minnesota starts in southern Aitkin County. So the
answer is: southern Aitkin County.
Q: What shares a border with RiviÃ ´lre−Verte in the province WRSU−FM broadcasts in?
A: WRSU−FM was licensed to broadcast to New Brunswick. RiviÃ ´lre−Verte, New Brunswick shares border with
Edmundston. So the answer is: Edmundston.
Q: When was the state of emergency declared in the country where the Senate is located?
A: The Senate is in the country of Kenya. The state of emergency was declared in Kenya on 20 October 1952. So the answer
is: 20 October 1952.
Q: How long is the US border with the country that borders the state where Finding Dory takes place?
A: Finding Dory is supposed to take place in California. The country that shares a border with California is Mexico. The
length of the us border with Mexico is 1,989 mi. So the answer is: 1,989 mi.
Q: What genre is the record label of the performer of So Long, See You Tomorrow associated with?
A: The performer of So Long, See You Tomorrow is Bombay Bicycle Club. The record label of Bombay Bicycle Club is
Island Records. The genre of Island Records is jazz. So the answer is: jazz.
Q: When did the first large winter carnival happen in Olivier Robitaille's place of birth?
A: Olivier Robitaille was born in Quebec City. The first large winter carnival in Quebec City happened in the 1894. So the
answer is: 1894.
Q: What is the genre of the record label of the band that performed on the Crush Tour?
A: The Crush Tour is performed by the band Bon Jovi. The record label of Bon Jovi is Island Records. The genre of Island
Records is jazz. So the answer is: jazz.
Q: When was the first railway line constructed between Kotri and the city where Marie Adelaide Leprosy Centre is located?
A: Marie Adelaide Leprosy Centre is located in Karachi. The first railway line between Kotri and Karachi was constructed in
April 1858. So the answer is: April 1858.
Q: Where is the crying stone found in the country in which Raphael Tuju holds citizenship?
A: Raphael Tuju is a citizen of Kenya. The crying stone in Kenya is found along the highway towards Kisumu. So the answer
is: along the highway towards Kisumu.
Q: When did Britain withdraw from the country where the village of Wadyan is found?
A: Wadyan is in the country of Bahrain. Britain withdraw from Bahrain in 1971. So the answer is: 1971.
Q: How many countries in Pacific National University's continent are recognized by the organization that mediated the truce
ending the Iran−Iraq war?
A: Pacific National University is located in Khabarovsk, Russia Khabarovsk, Russian is in the continent of Asia. The entity
that mediated the truce which ended the Iran−Iraq War is the UN. The number of member states that UN recognises in
Asia is 53. So the answer is: 53.
Listing 4: Chain-of-Thought annotations for IIRC.
Q: What is the age difference between the kicker and the quarterback for the Chargers?
A: The kicker for the Chargers is Nate Kaeding. The quarterback (QB) for the Chargers is Philip Rivers. Nate Kaeding was
born in the year 1982. Philip Rivers was born in the year 1981. Thus, the age difference between them is of 1 year. So
the answer is: 1.
Q: How many years was the ship that took the battalion from New South Wales to Ceylon in service?
A: The ship that took the battalion from New South Wales to Ceylon is General Hewitt. General Hewitt was launched in
Calcutta in 1811. General Hewitt was sold for a hulk or to be broken up in 1864. So she served for a total of 1864 −
1811 = 53 years. So the answer is: 53.
Q: What year was the theatre that held the 2016 NFL Draft built?
A: The theatre that held the 2016 NFL Draft is Auditorium Theatre. The Auditorium Theatre was built in 1889. So the answer
is: 1889.
Q: How long had Milan been established by the year that Nava returned there as a reserve in the first team's defense?
A: Nava returned to Milan as a reserve in the first team's defense in the year 1990. Milan had been established in the year
1899. Thus, Milan had been established for 1990 − 1899 = 91 years when Milan returned to Milan as a reserve in the
first team's defense. So the answer is: 91.
Q: When was the town Scott was born in founded?
A: Scott was born in the town of Cooksville, Illinois. Cooksville was founded in the year 1882. So the answer is: 1882.
Q: In what country did Wright leave the French privateers?
A: Wright left the French privateers in Bluefield's river. Bluefields is the capital of the South Caribbean Autonomous Region (
RAAS) in the country of Nicaragua. So the answer is: Nicaragua.
Q: Who plays the A−Team character that Dr. Hibbert fashioned his hair after?
A: Dr. Hibbert fashioned his hair after Mr. T from The A−Team. Mr T.'s birthname is Lawrence Tureaud. So the answer is:
Lawrence Tureaud.
Q: How many people attended the conference held near Berlin in January 1942?
A: The conference held near Berlin in January 1942 is Wannsee Conference. Wannsee Conference was attended by 15 people.
So the answer is: 15.
Q: When did the country Ottwalt went into exile in founded?
A: Ottwalt went into exile in the country of Denmark. Denmark has been inhabited since around 12,500 BC. So the answer is:
12,500 BC.
Q: When was the J2 club Uki played for in 2001 founded?
A: The J2 club that Uki played for is Montedio Yamagata. Montedio Yamagata was founded in 1984. So the answer is: 1984.
Q: When was the person who produced A Little Ain't Enough born?
A: A Little Ain't Enough was produced by Bob Rock. Bob Rock was born on April 19, 1954. So the answer is: April 19, 1954.
Q: Which of the schools Fiser is affiliated with was founded first?
A: The schools that Fiser is affiliated with (1) Academy of Music, University of Zagreb (2) Mozarteum University of Salzburg
(3) Croatian Music Institute orchestra. Academy of Music, University of Zagreb was founded in the year 1829.
Mozarteum University of Salzburg was founded in the year 1841. Croatian Music Institute was founded in the year 1827.
Thus, the school founded earliest of these is Croatian Music Institute. So the answer is: Croatian Music Institute.
Q: How many casualties were there at the battle that Dearing fought at under Jubal Early?
A: Under Jubal Early, Dearing fought the First Battle of Bull Run. First Battle of Bull Run has 460 union casualties and 387
confederate casualties. Thus, in total the First Battle of Bull Run had 460 + 387 = 847 casualties. So the answer is: 847.
Q: Which of the two congregations which provided leadership to the Pilgrims was founded first?
A: The congregations which provided leadership to the Pilgrims are Brownists and Separatist Puritans. Brownist was founded
in 1581. The Separatist Puritans was founded in 1640. Thus, Brownist was founded first. So the answer is: Brownist.
Q: How long had the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame been open when the band was inducted into it?
A: The band was inducted into Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in the year 2017. Rock and Roll Hall of Fame was established in
the year of 1983. Thus, Rock and Roll Hall of Fame been open for 2018 − 1983 = 34 years when the band was inducted
into it. So the answer is: 34.
Q: Did the Lord Sewer who was appointed at the 1509 coronation live longer than his king?
A: Lord Sewer who was appointed at the 1509 coronation was Robert Radcliffe, 1st Earl of Sussex. Lord Sever's king in 1509
was Henry VIII of England. Robert Radcliffe, 1st Earl of Sussex was born in the year 1483, and died in the year 1542.
So Robert lived for 1542 − 1483 = 59 years. Henry VIII of England was born in the year 1491 and died in the year 1547.
So Henry VIII lived for 1547 − 1491 = 56 years. Thus, Robert Radcliffe lived longer than Henry VIII. So the answer is:
yes.
Q: When was the place near where Manuchar was defeated by Qvarqvare established?
A: Manuchar was defeated by Qvarqvare near Erzurum. Erzurum was founded during the Urartian period. So the answer is:
Urartian period.
Q: What year was the man who implemented the 46 calendar reform born?
A: The man who implemented the 46 calendar reform is Julius Caesar. Julius Caesar was born in the year 100 BC. So the
answer is: 100 BC.
Q: How many years after the first recorded Tommy John surgery did Scott Baker undergo his?
A: The first recorded Tommy John surgery happened when it was invented in the year 1974. Scott Baker underwent Tommy
John surgery in the year 2012. Thus, Scott Baker underwent Tommy John surgery 2012 − 1974 = 38 years after it was
first recorded. So the answer is: 38.
Q: Which was the older of the two players who found the net in the Double−Headed Eagle of the North in the sixth final for
PAOK?
A: The two players who found the net in the Double−Headed Eagle of the North in the sixth final for PAOK are Koudas and
Matzourakis. Koudas was born on 23 November 1946. Matzourakis was born on 6 June 1949. Thus, the older person
among the two is Koudas. So the answer is: Koudas.